Robert Underwood journaling article w/revisions (#1573)
betterscientificsoftware/bssw.io: Articles/Blog/2023-03-08-productivity-practices-and-tools.md

#### Contributed by [Robert Underwood](https://robertu94.github.io) and [Mark C. Miller](https://github.com/markcmiller86)

We've all heard the slogans...*"Do more with less"*, *"Work smarter not harder"*, *"Failing to plan means planning to fail"*, *"Slower is faster"*.

Some critical skills *effective* software professionals need to master include managing a wide variety of tasks, accounting for how they spend their time, and continuously improving their own practices.
For many, journaling, task management, and time tracking tools will help with these practices.

However, as David Sparks and Mike Schmitz hosts of the [Focused podcast](https://www.relay.fm/focused) put it, "life is about more than cranking widgets".
The goal of these tools is not to enable getting more done (they probably will), but to enable people to be better stewards of their time and resources.
While it may be satisfying to write another unit test, release a new feature, or resolve a stubborn bug, there is always more we *could* be doing.
Mastering the practices and tools described here will help make more time available for what we believe we *should* be doing, most.

### Productivity Journaling

> Productivity journaling is different from general journaling (e.g. keeping a diary).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Journaling for productivity is different what most people think of as keeping a diary.
```
I prefer the phrase `Journaling for productivity` to `productivity journaling`.  Productivity Journaling isn't some special kind of journaling which is wholly distinct from other kinds of journaling, but rather something which has some distinctive attributes when used for a purpose

I'm also not sure that all of the thinkers that I am interacting with in my writing would distinguish a diary from a journal.  I would agree that it's different than the "Dear diary, today I ..." motif that was popular in the 1800s and in childhood folk tales, but that's not how everyone uses that term even if that is the majority usage.

> Productivity journaling captures tasks, observations, ideas, and lessons to be periodically reviewed, distilled and migrated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Journaling captures tasks, observations, ideas, and lessons to be periodically reviewed, distilled and migrated.
```

* **Tasks**: identify something that needs to be done (e.g. a bug to fix).
* **Observations**: describe something that happened worth remembering almost like in a lab journal.
* **Ideas**: capture unspecific but maybe important thoughts to be processed later (e.g. a better approach to a sorting problem).

> * **Lessons**: record key takeaways worth sharing with others (even your future self).

Reviewer: I like the addition of "even your future self here".

> Effective productivity journaling also demands that one periodically slow down, pause, reflect and review their record of activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Effective  journaling also demands that one periodically slow down, pause, and reflect to review their record of activity.
```

small grammar thing: a of verbs has to have the same actor and object if used in a conjunctive expression.  One does not slow down their record of activity

While there are many approaches to journaling, two useful sets of strategies come from [Bullet Journaling by Ryder Carroll](https://bulletjournal.com/) and [Building A Second Brain by Tiago Forte](https://www.buildingasecondbrain.com/)

#### Key Journaling Strategies

What to journal and how to journal are deeply personal.
Here are a few of the high level strategies to consider:

First, treat a journal as an append only log.
Journaling is most useful when one can make entries quickly and easily.
The more effort involved, the less likely it will be done.
Now, one may ask, *"if the journal is append only, and everything is jumbled together, how can you ever find anything?"*
The answer is in the second key strategy.

Second, periodically reflect and distill what was journaled.
Sort through the material to organize what is truly important and copy into more permanent homes.
Bullet journaling recommends using pen and paper journals, because it requires effort to physically copy things from one place to another.

Common reflection cadences are daily, weekly and monthly.
Where appropriate, it might be worthwhile to align reflection cadence with a project's sprint cadence.

> [Building a Second Brain](https://www.buildingasecondbrain.com/) recommends *progressive summarization* which involves underlining important entries upon daily review, highlighting important underlined entries upon weekly review and migrating (copying) important highlighted entries upon monthly review.

Reviewer: This should start a separate paragraph because it is a distinct idea from the timeliness of periodic review.  Progressive summarization is used outside of periodic reviews. For example, you might use it in a literature review.

Author: resolved in #0b796631 (incoming)

At longer cadences, more substantial reflection and review is appropriate.
For example, at monthly intervals, its reasonable to check in with yourself and ask...what should I stop, start, and continue for next month?
Are my practices productive and effective or do I need to make some adjustments?

> At quarterly intervals, ask yourself...what is my vision/theme/aspiration(s) for this season?

Reviewer: I prefer the word seasonally to quarterly.  While season often means 4 month intervals, it can also mean a distinct period of time (i.e. college was a season of my life).  It is in this latter meaning that I meant season.

Author: Fixed in 4133751a8dbda094c1b88a07c103c992f307b18a. I seemed to have left a mix of `quarter` and `seasonal` in there in first revision so adjusted a bit more. Lemme know if better now.

> How well did I live up to my aspirations last quarter?

Reviewer: I think something is lost when we remove the idea of moving from one journal to the next.  Yes, copying paper journals isn't for everyone, but the idea here is to garbage collect your thoughts so that you have the most relevant and useful thoughts always close at hand.

Author: Added 1695f5d8a93d31927c924f860bbe72d9b5431ee0

#### Tools to consider

> There is a video series from [Tiago Forte](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLVNXAaej57W7fbYoc_XJ0bA0T3k_Ye-Q2) that describes a variety of journaling tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a video series from [Tiago Forte](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLVNXAaej57W7fbYoc_XJ0bA0T3k_Ye-Q2) that describes which journaling tools work best for different kinds of person.
```

i like breaking these tools out per section.  However the video describes more than just a variety of tools, but how to find a tool that will work best for you depending on your "note taking archetype", a concept that I thought was important, but just didn't quite make the cut in my original post.

Author: Fixed I think in a37507247a57d4368f35665f2cfc59e23a162612

In addition, consider [Drafts](https://getdrafts.com/), [GoodNotes](https://www.goodnotes.com/), [Notion](https://www.notion.so/), [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/), [Evernote](https://evernote.com/).

### Task Management

While journaling aims to help *you* to be a generally more productive person, task management enables productivity of a particular plan of action.
If tasks are not managed, they can wind up being left undone or, maybe worse, done without respect for priorities.
In turn, this can hurt longer term goals.

For many, the tactile act of checking tasks off as done or moving tasks across a project board (e.g. Kanban) has great appeal because it provides a sense of progress.

#### What goes in to task management?

When defining tasks, make them SMART -- specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and timely.

> * Specific -- Specify as many of the [Five W's](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five_Ws) as possible (Who is responsible? What is the definition of done? When does it need to be completed? Where does it need to happen? Why is it necessary?)

Reviewer: The definition of done in my mind falls under "measurable", and some of the 5 w's also fall under other categories such as timely.  Additionally, some would push against including the 5 w's here because you don't need to have verbose entries for everything in your task manager for personal use that would answer these questions.  For example, I have an entry that just says `cusz tests` and I know what that means and who I need to talk to get it done. That is why I prefer the phrase unambigious here.

Author: Agreed...there is surely some overlap among the SMART categorizations. I think everyone would agree that a *deadline* is really part of being **Specific**. I don't some overlap really hurts though. I've changed `possible` to `practical`. That way, if some are not practical as in the `cusz test` example...thats fine.

Fixed in 8865e0378f317026612320bd09de46e71e9fbfc9

Reviewer: I accept this with the rephrasing to "practical"

* Measurable -- Identify a quantifieable way for an observer to judge progress or completion. What are the artifacts or evidence of progress or completion?
* Achievable -- Is everything needed (experience, skills, time, resources, etc.) to accomplish the task available? This may not always be clearly known before hand.
* Relevant -- Is the task related to broader goals and themes?

> * Time-Bound -- What is the deadline? Or, what is the the maximum time you are willing to put into this task to move it forward?

Reviewer: I liked your description of time-bounded here.

This information can help determine know how a task fits into larger goals as well as when and how it should be done.

Another useful tool for managing tasks is the [*Eisenhower Matrix*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_Things_First_(book)) which divides tasks along two axes: "urgent and not urgent" and "important and not important".
The approach suggests that you **DO** those tasks that are both urgent and important, **PLAN** those tasks that are not urgent but still important, **DELEGATE** those tasks that are urgent but not important and **ELIMINATE** those tasks that are neither urgent nor important.

#### Tools to consider

> If your work life is many short tasks that come and go quickly, consider a white board.

Reviewer: I vehemently disagree with this.  I use a whiteboard to manage very long running tasks.  I've also used pencil and paper for this.  I've even used a shared whiteboard in a software development team.  Yes, I will admit that a whiteboard doesn't scale to a point.  If you have a project the scope of ECP, you need something like Jira.  There are too many team members, that are too distributed, working on tens of thousands of tasks.  However, a whiteboard can scale to 30-80 tasks just fine.

Another piece of nuance that has been lost here is that you can use multiple tools for different things.  For example the whiteboard works well for projects, but doesn't do as well at reminding me that I need salsa from the grocery store -- I use Reminders for that.

Author: Not sure there is really enough here to be in *vehement* disagreement :wink:. 

Given the article's current length, I don't think all the nuance here needs to be captured.

Fixed in 7513fa8b69652c66c0b3b32120be2d9c01538e5f

Reviewer: My objection was that the prior phrasing leaves the impression that whiteboards (and by implication pencil and paper, because almost anything you can do on a whiteboard you can do with paper), are "second class citizens" to digital tools relegated people with only short tasks to do.  As knowledge workers most of the tasks that we do are long.  Therefore I read this as whiteboards aren't useful for knowledge workers.  That's where my objection was coming from. *vehement* is probably a strong phrasing, but I really do think that 80+% of people or more should start with and as many as 50+% should stick with analogue tools.

I'm open to leaving the nuance about multiple tools out.  I just wanted to note it here.

After spending 15 minutes on this new task C, you take a bathroom break.
On your way back, a user pulls you into their office asking for help and you spend 25 minutes with them (new task D).
Your four hour morning on task A has now become 3 hours and 20 minutes.

<table>
<tr><th>Planned work</th><th>Interruptions</th></tr>
<tr><td>

Task | Time Tallies | Total
:--- | :---: | ---:
Task A | \|\|\|\| &nbsp; \|\|\|\| &nbsp; \|\|\|\| &nbsp; \| | 3.25
Task B | \|\|\|\| &nbsp; \|\|\|\| &nbsp; \|\|\|\| &nbsp; \|\|\|\| | 4
**Total**||**7.25**

</td><td>

Task | Time Tallies | Total
:--- | :---: | ---:
Task C | \| | 0.25
Task D | \|\| | 0.5
**Total**||**0.75**

</td></tr> </table>

With experience, interruption volume can even be predicted and planned accordingly.
Alternatively, interruptions can sometimes be managed by simply being wholly unavailable (e.g. in your office not answering calls or email, etc.) except at prescribed times.

When reviewing time logs, ask yourself if time could or should have been spent more productivly.
Why did that happened?
What could be automated/delegated?

> Don't be surprised if you wind up being surprised what you actually spend your time on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may be surprised what you actually spend your time on.
```
This was just awkward wording.

#### Tools to consider

There are automatic and manual time tracking tools.
Manual time tracking can be straightforward as the example above shows.
Automatic tools track application usage and, if configured properly, an account for the same application being used for different purposes.
Some time tracking tools provide informative ways to visualize how time was spent as a summary.

> Consider [ActivityWatch](https://activitywatch.net/), [TimeWarrior](https://timewarrior.net/).

Reviewer: Activity watch is automatic, time warrior is a manual time tracking tool

Author: fixed in 0b3d8418f7b16f4e59df755364ba2746fbc94d5f

### Closing thoughts

Specific tools are not as important as actual practice.

> Decent pencil and paper approaches can be adopted for every practice mentioned here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Good pencil and paper approaches can be adopted for every practice mentioned here.
```

> In fact, some schools of thought recommend using pencil and paper over other tools because its inexpensive, quick and nearly infinitely flexible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, some schools of thought recommend using pencil and paper over other tools because its inexpensive, quick and nearly infinitely flexible.
```

Everything that I've read on this subject recommends that people start with pencil and paper, establish good habits there, and then  switch to software solutions (with exceptions for time/location based reminders).  Yes there are a few purists that say digital tools are awful, but the vast majority of people in this space use digital tools for some aspect of their workflow.

Author: Nothing really requested here. But, did find a minor word change worth making based on your remarks...

fixed in 7a617116468bedafe75827751b705562abbeeba1

Bullet journaling recommends using pen and paper journals, because it requires effort to physically copy things from one place to another.

Common reflection cadences are daily, weekly and monthly.
Where appropriate, it might be worthwhile to align reflection cadence with a project's sprint cadence.

[Building a Second Brain](https://www.buildingasecondbrain.com/) recommends *progressive summarization* which involves underlining important entries upon daily review, highlighting important underlined entries upon weekly review and migrating (copying) important highlighted entries upon monthly review.

At longer cadences, more substantial reflection and review is appropriate.
For example, at monthly intervals, its reasonable to check in with yourself and ask...what should I stop, start, and continue for next month?
Are my practices productive and effective or do I need to make some adjustments?
At longer intervals (e.g. seasonally), it is a good practice to ask yourself deeper questions...what is my vision/theme/aspiration(s) for this season?
How well have I live up to my aspirations so far?

> At these more substantial reflection points, its often a good practice to bring the old journal to a close and start a *new* journal by copying key information (e.g. migrating) forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At these more substantial reflection points, its often a good practice to bring the old journal to a close and start a *new* journal by copying key information (e.g. migrating) forward to encourage reflecting on what is worth moving forward.
```

I think we need to add a clause that explains why we need to do migrate forward.  I'm open to different phrasings of this.
